                             Command : DISTRIBUTE

NAME
   distribute - Establish distribution destination sector

Level: Basic

SYNTAX
   [##:##] Command : distribute <SECTS> <DISTSECT|.|h>

The  distribute command is used to specify the way that goods will travel dur-
ing an update.  Each sector is allowed to have one and only one  "distribution
sector" (a warehouse or road, typically).  Subsequent distribute commands will
replace the existing distribution sector.

For example,
   [##:##] Command : distribute 2,0 8,4

   highway at 2,0 delivers to 8,4.
   Distribution sector? 7,-1
   highway 2,0 new path distributes to 7,-1 (cost 0.200)
           Current best path is 'gguh'

This command changed the distribution path for sector 2,0 from a warehouse  at
8,4  to  a  warehouse at 7,-1. The cost is the mobility cost to move 1 normal-
weight unit from the sector to the warehouse.

DISTSECT is a normal empire sector specification. During  the  update,  empire
will  determine the cheapest existing path to the distribution sector, and use
that. (Note that the mobility cost for the path used during the  update  could
be  different  than  the cost reported to you when you use the distribute com-
mand, if you have re-designated sectors, or sectors were captured, etc) Again,
it will use the cheapest path available AT THE TIME OF THE UPDATE.

You may also use '.' or 'h' to specify no distribution sector.

   [##:##] Command : dist 2,0 .

   Distribution to and from 2,0 halted.

The  command  will  warn  you if there is no existing path completely owned by
you, and also if the path does not end at a warehouse.   It  is  not  required
that the distribution path end at a warehouse, but it is required that you own
all the sectors that the goods will travel along.

Distribution & the Update

One of the last things that takes place during the update, after  all  growth,
production,  delivery,  etc,  distribution  takes  place. (The only thing that
really happens after that is mobility increases) Each sector may have  product
thresholds and a distribution sector. A threshold is a target level for a par-
ticular commodity, like food. So, if the food threshold for a sector  is  100,
it  will try to maintain 100 food there. If it has more than 100 food, it will
export it to its distribution point. If it has less than 100, it will  try  to
import food from the distribution point to reach 100.

During the distribution phase of the update, all sectors (going left to right,
top to bottom) first export excess commodities, and then (again left to right,
top to bottom) import needed commodities.

In  order  to  either send things to or get things from a distribution sector,
you must own the distribution sector, and there must be a path of  owned  sec-
tors to it. In order to export something from a sector, you must have military
control of the sector. In order to import something from a  distribution  sec-
tor, you must have military control of the distribution sector.

Military control is defined as having military in the sector equal to at least
1/10th the number of unconverted civilians  there.   Military  in  land  units
count  towards  military  control.  Military in efficient security units count
double.

Mobility is used from the sector when sending "to"  the  distribution  sector.
When getting something "from" the distribution sector, mobility is paid by the
distribution sector.  See "info  Mobility"  for  an  explanation  of  mobility
costs.

Amount

The  amount  is  determined  by  the  threshold,  as explained above.  Use the
"threshold" command to specify what goods will flow to and from the warehouse.

Finding sectors with not dist point set

If you want to find sectors with no distribution point set, use the xdist  and
ydist selectors:

   [##:##] Command : level # ?xdist=xloc&ydist=yloc

This finds all sectors that have themselves as a distribution point.

Distributing civilians and military

When  distributing  civilians or military, no distribution point will ship out
its last civilian or the last military if there are no  civilians,  regardless
of thresholds set in sectors using it as a distribution point.

SEE ALSO
   deliver, threshold, level, Distribution

