                             Concept : Guerrilla

NAME
   Guerrilla - Guerrilla warfare

Level: Expert

Guerrillas are created in several ways; when a sector is captured by an enemy,
or when civilians riot for one reason or another  (starvation,  no  happiness,
etc).

Guerrillas have a generally detrimental effect on the well-being of your coun-
try.  Depending on the amount of military in the sector  they  "infest",  they
will  either attack the military there (but only if they have a good chance of
winning), blow up things (lowering sector efficiency), or,  if  they  are  too
badly outnumbered, they will try and move to a different sector.

If  there are no military in the "infested" sector at the end of the update to
break up guerrilla recruitment drives, your civilians'  loyalty  will  suffer.
If the sector is only occupied -- not completely owned by you, that is -- then
it will revert back to the old owner, renouncing the conqueror  and  returning
to  their  old allegiance.  The guerrillas will then move on to "convert" more
sectors.  Particular guerrilla bands will fight to the  death,  or  until  you
dissolve in disgust.

Guerrillas will attempt to "recruit" new followers from semi-loyal sectors and
from the uncompensated worker population.  Loyal civilians will  resist  these
recruiting  drives,  but uncompensated workers will always flock to the banner
of the guerrilla warrior.

The renowned guerrilla fighter Colonel (later Captain) Batguano gave a talk to
the  special forces, which was later made into an Armed Forces Technical Manu-
al.  In it he states,

        The first thing you learn is that the  che  are  hardier  than
        cockroaches,  eat  like  birds, and are simply invulnerable to
        gunfire and napalm.  They hide in the sewers.  There  are  two
        ways  to  handle  the guerrilla problem; one way requires high
        yield fusion weapons, and then they only die  when  everything
        else  in  the  sector is destroyed.  Unfortunately, collateral
        damage to civilian assets renders this strategy  negatory  ...
        [Col. Batguano then launches into a tirade against the "wimpy-
        assed liberals" which interfere with the proper guerrilla sup-
        pression techniques] ...  Almost every fully-populated area we
        moved into had a few dozen of the little monsters,  and  troop
        levels  of  50-100  per sector were found to adequately pacify
        the region.  Of course, depopulating the area prior  to  take-
        over often had a salutary effect on the number of che we later
        found...

You will be notified of the varying civil disturbances by  "production"  tele-
grams  showing  a body count of guerrillas killed, a sector being subverted by
revolutionary propaganda, or a sector lost to guerrilla activities!

Land units present in a sector help to fight them, fighting without any multi-
plier,  either offensive or defensive and without any fortification bonus, ex-
cept units with the "security" ability fight with a multiplier of four.   They
will also kill some che before anything else is done (commando raids).

SEE ALSO
   Populace, Occupation, Updates

