                           Concept : Infrastructure

NAME
   Infrastructure - Making your sectors better

Level: Basic

INFRASTRUCTURE

The  infrastructure  of  your sectors determines how well your sectors defend,
and how well you can move commodities and vehicles (land units)  through  your
sectors.

You  can  improve  the  "road", "rail" and "defense" efficiency of all of your
sectors, given that you have the  correct  commodities,  enough  mobility  and
enough money.

The  "road"  infrastructure  determines how well (i.e. the mobility cost) com-
modities and non-train vehicles travelling through your  sector  are  able  to
move at both distribution time and while you are moving them by hand.

The  "rail" infrastructure determines how well (i.e. the mobility cost) trains
are able to move through your sectors.

The "defense" infrastructure determines how well  (i.e.  the  defense  factor)
your  sector  defends  itself.   There is a maximum amount that the sector may
obtain.  Use the "show sect stats" to see what the maximum values are.

So, what you can do, by using up some commodities, mobility and  cash,  is  to
create  a  pseudo-highway  network through non-highway sectors.  You can still
create highway sectors for just the designation fee  of  the  sector,  but  it
costs  you  a whole sector to use it.  This is a trade-off for both being able
to use the sector and still move things through it at a reasonable cost.

When you "improve" the infrastructure of your sectors, you  are  improving  on
the  efficiency  of  part  of  that sector (either road, rail or defense.)  By
improving it, it's statistics get better.  For roads  and  rails,  that  means
that  the  mobility  cost  to move through goes down.  For defense, that means
that you are building up the "defenses" of  the  sector  towards  the  maximum
allowed (see "show sector stats" for the maximum values.)

Since infrastructure is on an efficiency basis, it takes damage just like reg-
ular efficiency.  So, when a sector is shelled or bombed,  the  infrastructure
there is damaged in an efficiency based manner.

Infrastructure  is  also  not affected by rebuilding the sector.  So, once you
build infrastructure, it stays in place until the sector is  damaged  in  some
way.

Use  the  "sinfrastructure"  command to see what the current infrastructure of
your country looks like.

Use the "improve" command to improve the infrastructure of your sectors.

To find out the required amounts of materials, mobility,  and  money  use  the
"show sect build" command.

Also, defensive infrastructure is not always improvable.  See the version info
to see if the DEFENSE_INFRA option is enabled or not.  If it is  not  enabled,
the  defense infrastructure of the sector is always the same as the efficiency
of the sector.  If it is enabled, you must improve your sectors defensive val-
ues using the "improve" command.

SEE ALSO
   improve, sinfrastructure, Mobility, Sectors

