                                Command : LOST

NAME
   lost - Report lost items

Level: Basic

SYNTAX
   [##:##] Command : lost

The  lost  command  displays all lost items currently in the database for your
country.

All lost items are timestamped at the time they were lost.  If you had a  pre-
viously  lost item in the database, and then build a new item of the same type
with the same ID, or regain an item of the same type with the same ID,  it  is
removed from the database.  This is done because the new item will now show up
in the other dump commands, and is no longer lost.

Lost items are kept in the database for 48 hours (default)  but  may  be  kept
longer at the deity's discretion.  Also, issuing the lost command does not re-
move items from the database.  That is where the timestamp  functionality  be-
comes important.

While  the lost command does not take any arguments, it does take the standard
syntax for selecting information.  (see "info Selector").

A typical usage might be:
   [##:##] Command : lost ?timestamp>854954677
which would list data for all lost items timestamped after 854954677.   (Time-
stamps are kept in system seconds.)

A lost command lists all the lost items headed by:

   Sun Feb  9 22:16:37 1997
   DUMP LOST ITEMS 855544597
   type id x y timestamp

The  first  line  is the date.  The second line is the "DUMP LOST ITEMS <time-
stamp>" where the <timestamp> field is the current timestamp.  The third  line
is the columns which are output.

These columns represent:

     type  The type of lost item.  They are as follows:
               0 - Sector
               1 - Ship
               2 - Plane
               3 - Land unit
               4 - Nuclear stockpile
       id  The  #  of  the ship, plane, land unit or nuke.  All of these items
           are identified by ID.  Sectors are identified by x and y.
        x  The x coordinate of the lost item when it was lost.
        y  The y coordinate of the lost item when it was lost.
timestamp  The timestamp of when the item was lost.

SEE ALSO
   xdump, dump, ldump, sdump, ndump, pdump, Ships, Planes,  Nukes,  LandUnits,
Sectors

