                              Command : PARADROP

NAME
   paradrop - Attack a sector from the air

Level: Expert

SYNTAX
   [##:##] Command : paradrop <TRANSPORTS> <ESCORTS> <SECT> route|destination

The  "paradrop" command is used to sneak troops behind enemy lines, or to drop
in unawares on lightly-defended enemy islands or outposts.   It  represents  a
complete  mission  for  one or more transports and escorts taking off from one
place and returning to base at the end of the mission.

<TRANSPORTS> represents a list of planes to carry the paratroopers to the tar-
get  sector.   Only planes with capability para and sufficient mobility, based
in a sector stocked with petrol and military, will  be  successfully  selected
for the mission.

<ESCORTS>  represent  a  list of fighter planes which are capable of escorting
the transports all the way to the target.  To be selected, escorts  must  have
fuel and mobility.

<SECT>  represents  an  assembly point, where all of the planes in the mission
meet before proceeding on to the target sector.  The assembly  point  must  be
owned  by  you  or an ally, or you or an ally must have a ship there.  It must
not be more than four sectors away from any of the  planes  selected  for  the
mission.

Route  is  a normal empire path specification. You may also give a destination
sector on the command line, or at any time while giving the route, and  empire
will use the best path from the current sector to the desired destination sec-
tor.

Paradrop missions can be intercepted just like any other  mission.   See  info
"Intercept".

If the planes manage to fight through enemy air defenses and arrive on-target,
each transport in the mission will be shot at  by  any  guns  present  on  the
ground.   Surviving transports will drop the paratroops they carry, which will
attack any enemy military occupying the target sector.

See info "Attacking" for the exact procedure. The sector  being  air-assaulted
will  have exactly the same reaction to being conquered as if it were attacked
by land.

Note that a plane must be at least 40%  efficient  before  it  can  leave  the
ground.

SEE ALSO
   bomb, fly, drop, recon, Attacking, Mobility, Combat, Planes

