                             Command : RELATIONS

NAME
   relations - Shows diplomatic relations between countries

Level: Basic

SYNTAX
   [##:##] Command : relations

The  relations command displays your diplomatic status with other nations.  If
the optional argument is specified, the command displays that country's diplo-
matic status with other nations.

The data displayed by the nation command is formatted as a single page report.
   [##:##] Command : relations

           MGM Diplomatic Relations Report       Sat Jun 17 23:24:46 1989

           0) POGO                  Allied    Allied
           1) 1                     Neutral   Neutral
           2) Groonland             At War    Hostile

   [##:##] Command : relations 2

           Groonland Diplomatic Relations Report       Sat Jun 17 23:24:46 1989

           0) POGO                  Neutral   Neutral
           1) 1                     Allied    Neutral
           3) MGM                   Hostile   At War

Relations  are: "Allied", "Friendly", "Neutral", "Hostile", and "At War". Each
has certain ramifications.

Allied  Your ally is someone you trust deeply, and are willing to make  sacri-
fices  for.  If you are allied with someone, then your forts, ships, planes, &
artillery will support them in battle.  Also, they can over-fly you,  and  you
will  not  be  told.  (I.e. an ally can map you out easily).  When you use the
"wall" command, it sends a flash message to  all  of  your  allies  (see  info
wall).   Unless  the ALL_BLEED option is in effect, you will benefit from tech
produced by your allies, but not by others .  Allied nations  are  assumed  to
have "friendly" trade relations.

Friendly  When you accept a country as a trustworthy trading partner, then you
establish friendly relations towards them.  This allows them to sail ships in-
to  your  harbors, load and unload goods, and have their ships repaired there.
You are allowed to "tend" friendly ships.  You may send "flash" messages  (see
info flash) to friendly nations.  You will be warned, however, if they overfly
your territory.  And if they do it enough times, your diplomatic relations to-
wards  them will be automatically downgraded.  You may "spy" on a friendly na-
tion with no consequences.

Neutral  You start out neutral towards all countries.  It  simply  means  that
you  are ambivalent towards them.  If they overfly your territory, you will be
warned and your relations will automatically downgrade.  Caught spies will  be
deported.

Hostile  If  you  are  suspicious that a nation may be planning to attack you,
but you are not committed to an all out war against them, then you should  de-
clare  hostile relations towards them.  This will ensure that your planes will
intercept theirs if they try to over-fly you, and  your  forts  will  fire  on
their  ships  when they sail within range.    Also, your a-sat's and ABMs will
attempt to intercept their satellites and missiles independent of  the  target
sector they have launched them at, and your ships with anti-missile capability
will attempt to intercept any incoming marine missiles within  range.   Caught
spies will be shot.

War  If  you are committed to expending major resources against a nation, then
you should declare war on them.  This will cause all of your ships, artillery,
planes  and  missiles which have been put on a mission to react to enemy move-
ment.

Also, there is an automatic progression. If someone you are  allied  with  at-
tacks  you,  you  become  hostile  towards them. If someone you are neutral to
over-flies or attacks you, you become hostile towards them. Neither  of  these
progressions can lead to war, however, they both stop at hostility.

SEE ALSO
   Diplomacy

