                               Command : SUPPLY

NAME
   supply - Cause a unit to draw supplies

Level: Basic

SYNTAX
   [##:##] Command : supply <UNIT/ARMY>

The  supply  command  causes  a  unit  to draw enough supplies from its supply
sources to make sure that it has its basic load of supplies.  Supply tells you
which units have enough supplies.

A basic load of supplies for a unit consists of:
        1) enough food to eat for one update

        2) enough shells to fire once
                A unit uses shells equal to its ammo stat to fire once.
                Use the "show" command to find out how much ammo
                the unit uses per shot.

If  the  unit has enough of all these things, it is said to be 'in supply'.  A
lack of any of these things is enough to make the unit 'out of supply'.

When supplies are drawn & used

When a unit needs to draw supplies, such as when you use the  supply  command,
or the unit wishes to attack, or is attacked, etc, it must attempt to get them
from supply  sources.  Other  things  may  use  the  same  routines,  such  as
ships/forts/sectors, which will draw shells when they need them to fire defen-
sively.

Supply Sources

There are four sources of supply. In each case, the unit must be within supply
range of the source. Supply range is:

   10 * ((tech+50)/(tech+200) sectors.

In  addition there must be a valid supply path to the source. A supply path is
a path of sectors owned by the owner of the unit  that  leads  to  the  supply
source.  (Note that the path may be of any length.. only the supply source it-
self must be within supply range.. this is to make the coding simpler, and may
change in the future) The best path (in terms of mobility use) will be used.

In each case, mobility is used to move the supplies.

The first source of supply checked is the sector the unit is in.

If  the  unit's  needs can't be satisfied there, it looks for an owned harbor,
warehouse or headquarters that is at least 60% efficient. Drawing  from  these
sources  uses mobility from the source sector. (A headquarters will NOT supply
a unit if it has no distribution path)

If still in need, the unit will look for an owned supply ship  (one  that  has
the  supply ability) in an owned harbor.  The harbor must be at least 2% effi-
cient. This uses mobility from the harbor.

If it still can't find enough supplies, the unit will look for an  owned  unit
with  the  'supply' ability. (see info show for information on how to find out
about abilities of units) In this case, the supply unit uses its  mobility  to
use the supplies.

If after all this the unit can't get enough, it is out of supplies.

Note  that no supply source will give up enough food to make it starve. In ad-
dition, land units will keep enough shells to fire once.

   [##:##] Command : supply *
War band #2 has supplies
   4 units

SEE ALSO
   lload, LandUnits, Attacking, Mobility

